feat: account revamp (#103)
web3-storage/specs: w3-account.md

# Abstract

The W3 protocol governs user interactions within self-certified Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)-based namespaces. Access control to these namespaces, for simplicity referred to as spaces, is managed through delegated capabilities in [UCAN] format.

Users access their spaces across various user agents operating on multiple devices. Here we introduce [account] primitive designed to enable synchronization of the access across authorized user agents with a user-friendly experience.

## Language

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119).

# Introduction

> In W3 protocol, a namespace, or space for short, corresponds to an asymmetric keypair and is identified by a [`did:key`] URI. The private key holder, is the [owner] of that namespace and has absolute authority over it. They can delegate limited or absolute authority over the namespace to any other [principal]. However, managing delegations across multiple user agents on multiple devices presents several user experience challenges:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the W3 protocol, a namespace, or space for short, corresponds to an asymmetric keypair and is identified by a [`did:key`] URI. The private key holder, is the [owner] of that namespace and has absolute authority over it. They can delegate limited or absolute authority over the namespace to any other [principal]. However, managing delegations across multiple user agents on multiple devices presents several user experience challenges:
```

IMO "namespace" is confusing as it implies names/mutability.

1. To synchronizing namespace access across user agents they need to discover their [`did:key`] identifiers and level of access granted to them.

> 2. Recovering access in case when all devices are lost becomes impossible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Recovering access in the case when all devices are lost becomes impossible.
```

> To address these issues, we propose the concept of an account. Account SHOULD have a human-meaningful identifier such as email address. We propose use of email addresses as account identifiers so that derived [`did:mailto`] can act as the [principal] in the [UCAN] delegation chain. This creates [principal] that can be used to aggregate capabilities and manage them.

Reviewer 2: > Account SHOULD have a human-meaningful identifier such as email address.

just curious, but why add this recommendation? is MAY sufficient? is there anything bad about a `did:key` account?

Author: There is nothing wrong with aggregating capabilities under the `did:key` principal, but I think calling it an account is just misleading. It just semantics, but I think they matter. For example you can not login as `did:key` one because you can't expect user to type it in, but even they could we simply do not have flows to support that, if you'll try to request authorization from `did:key` we will error.

So I think we should not call it account unless you can login with it.

> To address these issues, we propose the concept of an account. Account SHOULD have a human-meaningful identifier such as email address. We propose use of email addresses as account identifiers so that derived [`did:mailto`] can act as the [principal] in the [UCAN] delegation chain. This creates [principal] that can be used to aggregate capabilities and manage them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To address these issues, we propose the concept of an account. An account SHOULD have a human-meaningful identifier such as email address. We propose use of email addresses as account identifiers so that derived [`did:mailto`] can act as the [principal] in the [UCAN] delegation chain. This creates [principal] that can be used to aggregate capabilities and manage them.
```

Account can be used to solve both discovery and recovery problems:

> 1. Instead of user agents trying discovering each to delegate capabilities with one another, all capabilities get delegated to an account which is then used to re-delegate them as necessary to individual agents.

Reviewer: > trying discovering each to delegate capabilities with one another

waaaat?

```suggestion
1. Instead of user agents trying to discover each other in order to delegate capabilities, all capabilities get delegated to an account which is then used to re-delegate them as necessary to individual agents.
```

> 2. Recovery is possible even if all devices has been lost as long as the user retains control of their email, because account can always delegate capabilities to new agents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Recovery is possible even if all devices have been lost as long as the user retains control of their email, because an account can always delegate capabilities to new agents.
```

> ℹ️ This specification mainly focuses on [`did:mailto`] identifiers, but implementations are free to extend it to various other [DID methods].
>
> Also, note that [account] is defined as non [`did:key`] identifier because [`did:key`] identifiers can aggregate and re-delegate capabilities natively with [UCAN]s. [Account]s simply bring human-meaningful identifiers that users can type in on every agent. Use of out of bound authorization also frees users from key management.

## Serialization

[UCAN]s MUST be encoded with some [IPLD] codec. [DAG-CBOR] is RECOMMENDED.

## Concepts

## Roles

There are several distinct roles that [principals] may assume in described specification:

| Name        | Description                                                                                                                                    |
| ----------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | Principal | The general class of entities that interact with a UCAN. Listed in the `iss` or `aud` field |

Reviewer 2: most other terms in this table get elaborated upon in a `###` section below. It could be helpful to eventually do the same for Principal

| Account    | [Principal] identified by memorable identifier like [`did:mailto`]. |
| Agent       | [Principal] identified by [`did:key`] identifier, representing a user in some application installation |
| Issuer | Principal sharing access. It is the signer of the [UCAN]. Listed in the `iss` field |
| Audience | Principal access is shared with. Listed in the `aud` field |

### Space

Namespace, or space for short, is an owned resource that can be shared. It corresponds to the asymmetric keypair and is identified by the [`did:key`] URI.

> Space is always listed in the `with` field of the [UCAN] capability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A space DID is always listed in the `with` field of the [UCAN] capability.
```

### Owner

> The [owner] of the [space] is the holder of its private key. Space owner can share limited or full access to owned space via [UCAN] delegation issued by the [space] [`did:key`] and signed with a [space] private key.

Reviewer 2: can we call it [controller](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#dfn-did-controllers) vs owner?

Author: Sounds like it would be more confusing than helpful. According to linked definition controller is entity that is able to modify DID document, but in case of `did:key` no one actually can modify did document even private key holder.

I'm amendable to this, but personally owner of the space seems more intuitive to me and I do not consider it to be the same thing as DID controller.

> The [owner] of the [space] is the holder of its private key. Space owner can share limited or full access to owned space via [UCAN] delegation issued by the [space] [`did:key`] and signed with a [space] private key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [owner] of the [space] is the holder of its private key. The space owner can share limited or full access to their owned space via a [UCAN] delegation issued by the [space] [`did:key`] and signed with the [space]'s private key.
```

### Account

An _account_ is a principal identified by a memorable identifier such as [`did:mailto`]. It is a principal that aggregates access to user spaces and that manages access of various user [agent]s.

> Account enables familiar authorization and recovery email flows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An account enables familiar authorization and recovery email flows.
```

### Agent

> An _agent_ is a principal identified by a [`did:key`] identifier. Users interact with a system through different _agents_ across multiple devices and applications. It is strongly RECOMMENDED that _agents_ use [non-extractable keys] where possible.

Reviewer 2: _Agents_ SHOULD use
```suggestion
An _agent_ is a principal identified by a [`did:key`] identifier. Users interact with a system through different _agents_ across multiple devices and applications. _Agents_ SHOULD use [non-extractable keys] where possible.
```

Reviewer 2: SHOULD is a recommendation in https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt

> ℹ️ Note that _agents_ are meant to be ephemeral, implying that they could be disposed of or created on demand.

### Authority

> Authority is trusted [DID] identifier. For example various subsystems may recognize and signatures from a global service authority.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Authority is a trusted [DID] identifier. For example various subsystems may recognize and signatures from a global service authority.
```

App->>Space:🔑 Create namespace

Space ->> Email: 🎫 Delegate capabilities
note over Space,Email:can:*<br/>with: did:key:z7Gf…xSpace
```

> > On first run, application creates a new namespace and delegates full authority to the user account. For the simplicity we omit steps where application first requests access from an account before deciding to create new space.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> On first run, an application creates a new namespace and delegates full authority to the user account. For simplicity we omit steps where the application first requests access from an account before deciding to create a new space.
```

### Delegating capabilities

[Account] CAN authorize user agents by re-delegating a set of capabilities.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
participant Alice as 👩‍💻<br/><br/>did:key:z6Mkk…sxALi
participant Email as 📫 bob@gmail.com
participant Bob as 👨🏽‍💻 <br/><br/>did:key:z6Mkr…jnz2z

Alice ->> Email: 🎫 Delegate capabilities
note over Alice,Bob:<br/>with: did:key:z6Mkk…sxALi<br/>can:store/add
Email ->> Bob: 🎫 Delegate capabilities
```

> **Alice** delegates the `store/add` capability to **Bob**s [account]. Later **Bob**s user agent gets re-delegated the capability from the [account].

### Authorization

> Delegations issued by [`did:key`] principal are authorized by signing payload with private key. Delegations issued by a [`did:mailto`] principal are not authorized by signing over payload as there is no public key associated with [`did:mailto`] to sign it with. Instead, such delegations are authorized through an interactive email flow in which [account] holder is able to review and approve requested authorization through an action.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Delegations issued by a [`did:key`] principal are authorized by signing the payload with their private key. Delegations issued by a [`did:mailto`] principal are not authorized by signing over the payload as there is no private key associated with [`did:mailto`] to sign it with. Instead, such delegations are authorized through an interactive email flow in which the [account] holder is able to review and approve the requested authorization through an action.
```

> Since there is no public key to sign the [UCAN] payload define an extension to the [UCAN] specification introducing two new signature types that can be used in delegations issued by [`did:mailto`] principals.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since there is no private key to sign the [UCAN] payload, we define an extension to the [UCAN] specification that introduces two new signature types that can be used in delegations issued by [`did:mailto`] principals.
```

> We also define verification mechanism for these signature types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also define a verification mechanism for these signature types.
```

### DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM) Signature

> ⚠️ [w3up] implementation currently does not support this signature type.

The [`did:mailto`] principal MAY issue a delegation signed using a DomainKeys Identified Mail ([DKIM]) signature.

This signature MUST be generated by sending a message from the [account] email address corresponding to the issuer [`did:mailto`] with the `Subject` header set to the [authorization payload].

The signer MUST derive the "DKIM payload" from the received message according to the [RFC6376] specification and encode it in UTF-8 encoding. Resulting bytes MUST be encoded as a [Nonstandard `VarSig` signature] with the `alg` parameter set to `"DKIM"`.

#### Authorization Payload

The [UCAN] data model for the desired delegation issued by [`did:mailto`] MUST be structured per [UCAN-IPLD Schema] specification, except for the `s` field, which MUST be omitted.

The IPLD [link] of constructed data model MUST be derived and used the `cid` when formatting according payload according to the following [ABNF] definition.

```abnf
auth := "I am signing ipfs://" cid "to grant access to this account"
cid  := z[a-km-zA-HJ-NP-Z1-9]+
```

### Attestation Signature

> Delegation MAY be authorized through an interactive email flow where [account] holder is emailed request to approve an authorization that gives an agent access to specific set of capabilities. If user approves by clicking embedded link signed [attestation] is issued that confirms that delegation has been authorized through an interactive flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Delegation MAY be authorized through an interactive email flow where the [account] holder is emailed a request to approve an authorization that gives an agent access to specific set of capabilities. If the user approves by clicking the embedded link, a signed [attestation] is issued that confirms that the delegation has been authorized through the interactive flow.
```

> In this scenario delegation issued by the [`did:mailto`] identifier MAY be signed using _attestation signature_ type. This signature alone MUST NOT be considered as a valid authorization. Delegation signed with _attestation signature_ MUST be accompanied with [UCAN attestation] issued by the trusted [authority].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this scenario a delegation issued by the [`did:mailto`] identifier MAY be signed using the _attestation signature_ type. This signature alone MUST NOT be considered as a valid authorization. A delegation signed with an _attestation signature_ MUST be accompanied with a [UCAN attestation] issued by the trusted [authority].
```

> If delegation is signed with _attestation signature_, but is not accompanied with [UCAN attestation] from trusted [authority] it MUST be considered invalid. In this scenario implementer MAY initiate interactive verification flow and issue [UCAN attestation] retroactively instead of denying service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If delegation is signed with an _attestation signature_, but is not accompanied with a [UCAN attestation] from a trusted [authority] it MUST be considered invalid. In this scenario the implementer MAY initiate an interactive verification flow and issue the [UCAN attestation] retroactively instead of denying service.
```

> > When received delegation is issued by the `did:mailto:web.mail:alice`, signed with _attestation signature_, but is not accompanied by [UCAN attestation], receiver could iteratively confirm authorization by sending an email to `alice@web.mail` address with a confirmation link, which when followed issues [attestation] from the receiver resuming the invocation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> When the received delegation is issued by the `did:mailto:web.mail:alice`, signed with _attestation signature_, but is not accompanied by a [UCAN attestation], the receiver could iteratively confirm authorization by sending an email to `alice@web.mail` with a confirmation link, which, when followed, issues an [attestation] from the receiver resuming the invocation.
```
